---
layout: post
title:  "E-Waste: How Corporations Take Control and Deceive The Public"
date:   2025-05-07 22:10 -0500
categories: Research E-Waste Corporations Control
author: MajesticTwelve
---



**"E-Waste: How Corporations Take Control and Deceive The Public"**


Electronic Waste or E-Waste is a type of waste that mainly includes
throwing out electronics like phones and computers. These also include
secondhand products that are not being sold. This type of waste contains
a lot of hazardous materials including lead, mercury, and chromium.
These are carcinogenic materials that can cause cancer in the human body
and also could further damage the environment. This has become such a
big issue in society because of planned obsolescence, greenwashing, and
people\'s spending habits.


Planned Obsolescence is when the lifespan of a product has been
intentionally made to fail over a set period. Major phone manufacturers
shorten the lifespan of their devices because it makes consumers spend
more money on a new phone even if the rest of their device is working
properly. For example, Google has been in the news recently because they
used this tactic with their Google Pixel 4a smartphone through a
February 2025 software update. Google wrote in their announcement saying
that "for some devices, the software update reduces available battery
capacity and impacts charging performance" ("Pixel 4A Battery
Performance Program - Pixel Phone Help"). Google does not comment on the
reason why they have intentionally handicapped the 4a's battery life.
Some users were so disgruntled that they filed an FCC (Federal
Communications Commission) complaint about this issue (McClain).
Technology journalists are not sure about the new software update
because "the update could mean 'reduced charging performance' or how
\[much\] the phone shows battery capacity" (Davis). This is one of the
many reasons why planned obsolescence is dangerous because companies are
nudging people into upgrading their phones so often. Another, Windows 11
from Microsoft set a hardware limitation because of security, forcing
users to upgrade their computers or deal with an insecure operating
system like Windows 10 in October of 2025. There will be an increase of
e-waste because of Windows 11 higher system requirements and lack of
security updates for Windows 10. Canalys is a market analysis firm that
wrote the "termination of Windows 10 support could prevent hundreds of
millions of computers from getting second lives. These computers would
be put into landfills" (Caddy & Jessop). This can lead to more planned
obsolescence in the future because companies knowingly break the
functionality of their own devices. Therefore, it produces more e-waste
than ever before while trying to be environmentally friendly.


Greenwashing is a term that is used to describe the act of a corporation
trying to conceal and obfuscate their negative environmental impact.
Major manufacturers use schemes like carbon offsets, where a piece of
tradable assets or certificates that are linked to lowered carbon
emissions into the atmosphere. For example, Apple will buy a piece of
this tradable asset and use it to "offset" their carbon emissions, like
funding a cause that helps with removing carbon from the atmosphere
(Gurgle). Apple has been using these schemes which led to accusations of
Greenwashing by The BEUC (Bureau EuropÃ©en des Unions de Consommateurs)
and claims that Apple is not being environmentally friendly and carbon
neutral. This became a problem because Apple could use this to push
their environmental image further while obfuscating their actual
footprint. The European Union is continuing its efforts to stop
misleading consumers because a lot of companies stretch the truth about
their environmental footprint. In September of 2023, Apple marketed the
Apple Watch Series 9 as "the first-ever carbon neutral products".
Monique Goyens, the Director-General of the BEUC mentioned that these
"Carbon neutral claims are scientifically inaccurate and mislead
consumers," and "The BEUC said that by 2026 it would ban "neutrality"
claims that are based on the purchase of carbon credits" (Byran). The
European Union is trying to ban the use of green marketing terms like
"environmentally friendly" and "natural" because the use of carbon
offset schemes in conjunction with misleading advertisements can have an
impact on E-Waste and the environment because of consumers thinking they
are doing something good for the planet. On the other hand, companies
have already made the product through research and development, then
shifting the emissions to an environmentally friendly program or an NGO
(Non-Governmental-Organization), and the product cycle continues every
year causing more E-Waste. When marketing comes to people\'s spending
habits and what they do with their older devices and electronics, and
how it impacts others and society's consumption habits as a whole.


When people buy something new, it leads to a good feeling. For example,
a phone, car, or clothes, this is instant gratification. It affects
people's spending habits where people purchase things on a yearly or
bi-yearly on new products, but they keep or throw away their own
devices. This can lead to more electronic waste hurting the environment.
The Canadian government created a survey on how people repair or replace
their old phones and computers. Gordon Dewis analyzed that "since 2011,
the proportion of households that had an unwanted cell phone that
increased from 8% to 11%." (Dewis). It demonstrates that people are
holding onto their devices because of spending more money on goods that
Canadians do not need. Dewis finds the same pattern in computers where
\"the trend of the rate at which households have reported having
unwanted computers to dispose of is negative." The inclusion of
computers in this study shows that people hold onto their computers
longer than their smartphones because they become more reliable as
technology progresses (Dewis). In India there was a study of 1039 people
that responded with a similar outlook as Canadians. Indians provided
their answers and explanations about keeping their mobile devices for
longer. The surveyors found out that "over 42% of the respondents said
that they purchase or replace a mobile phone when the older one becomes
non-functional" (Borthakur & Singh). Indians prefer to hold onto their
phones longer than their Canadian counterparts due to many factors like
lifestyle or economic standing. The study also finds that people from
India are not as environmentally aware as Canadians because of how
electronic waste is handled. The surveyors wrote about how the
"Environmental awareness in India is still in its infancy where most
consumers are not conscious of environmentally responsible behaviors."
It comes down to the fact that electronic waste is inherently dangerous
to human health and there should be programs in place to take care of
the overburden of hazardous materials, so people have a cleaner
environment to live in. For example, the USEPA United States
Environmental Protection Agency has an initiative for cleaning up
e-waste in the Carribean. Where they clean up E-Waste from beaches and
the ocean, so the Carribean ecosystem stays safe from E-Waste. (USPEA)


Take into consideration what tech companies are doing when they are
committing planned obsolescence with artificially diminishing their own
products, then use greenwashing that obfuscate their emissions, and sell
you new products so that people spend their money on new electronics and
retire older ones. This should be worrying to everyone who cares about
the wellbeing of the environment because of E-Waste and how carcinogenic
effects on the human body. This affects people who are in the
disenfranchised countries with poor waste management, like India, China,
and many other countries in Africa.


E-Waste poses an immense threat to human health and the environment as a
whole because of the harmful practices that companies lean towards
profit over conserving the environment. People could consider the other
possibilities of keeping their devices for longer instead of replacing
their phones and computers, whilst not giving into planned obsolescence,
greenwashing and unneeded spending. However, there are solutions that
can help mitigate these problems, including the promotion of repair
culture to show that hardware hacking is a way to remove hardware
restrictions, adopting eco-friendly manufacturing and holding people for
their environmental impacts. This can help reduce carcinogenic
electronic waste and help make sure that the developing world does not
end up in a more broken environment as it still stands today.

[![Donate using Liberapay](https://liberapay.com/assets/widgets/donate.svg)](https://liberapay.com/MajesticTwelve/donate)


> Works Cited
>
> Borthakur, Anwesha, and Pardeep Singh. "Understanding Consumers'
> Perspectives of Electronic Waste in an Emerging Economy: A Case Study
> of New Delhi, India." *Energy, Ecology and Environment*, 12 Feb. 2022,
> [https://doi.org/10.1007/s40974](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40974-022-00242-9)
> -022-00242-9.
>
> Bryan, Kenza. "Apple's "Carbon Neutral" Claims Come under Scrutiny."
> *Financial Times*, 24 Oct. 2023,
> [www.ft.com/content/90392004-97e0-4444-a5cd-82220fe52510](https://www.ft.com/content/90392004-97e0-4444-a5cd-82220fe52510).
>
> Caddy, Ben, and Kieren Jessop. "Canalys Insights - the End of Windows
> 10 Support Could Turn 240 Million PCs into E-Waste." *\@Canalys*, 20
> Dec. 2023,
> [www.canalys.com/insights/end-of-windows-10-support-could-turn-240-million-pcs-into-e-waste](https://www.canalys.com/insights/end-of-windows-10-support-could-turn-240-million-pcs-into-e-waste).
>
> Davis, Wes. "Google's New Pixel 4A Update Is Going to Lower Battery
> Life for Some Owners." *The Verge*, 8 Jan. 2025,
> <https://www.theverge.com/2025/1/7/24338566/google-pixel-4a-battery-stability-replacement-reduced-capacity>
>
> Dewis, Gordon. "Repair or Replace: What Are Canadians Doing with Their
> Old Cell Phones and Computers?" *Www150.Statcan.gc.ca*, 15 Feb. 2022,
> ww150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/16-002-x/2022001/article/00001-eng.htm
>
> Gurgel, Angelo. "Carbon Offsets." *MIT Climate Portal*, MIT, 11 Sept.
> 2020, climate.mit.edu/explainers/carbon-offsets.
>
> McClain, Jennifer. "Pixel 4a Battery Performance Program - Google
> Pixel Community."
>
> https://support.google.com/pixelphone/thread/317228576/pixel-4a-battery-performance-program?hl=en.
> Accessed 10 Mar. 2025. 6 Jan 2025
>
> Pixel 4a Battery Program "Pixel 4A Battery Performance Program - Pixel
> Phone Help.", support.google.com/pixelphone/answer/15701861 Accessed
> 10 Mar. 2025.
>
> US EPA. "Cleaning up Electronic Waste (E-Waste) \| US EPA." *US EPA*,
> 15 Nov. 2023,
> [www.epa.gov/international-cooperation/cleaning-electronic-waste-e-waste](https://www.epa.gov/international-cooperation/cleaning-electronic-waste-e-waste).
>
> www.theverge.com/2025/1/7/24338566/google-pixel-4a-battery-stability-
> replacement-reduced-capacity. Accessed 10 Mar. 2025.
